Updated Fusion methods (#21)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript: content/03.methods.md

### Gene Expression Abundance Estimation

> ### RNA Fusion Calling and Prioritization

Reviewer: The section is written as passive voice. Can you write it as active voice? We ran... instead of XYZ was run.

Reviewer 2: fixed

> **Gene Fusion Detection**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Gene Fusion Detection

```

Reviewer: Please use headers :)

> > Arriba v1.1.0 and STAR-Fusion 1.5.0 fusion detection tools were set up using CWL on CAVATICA.

Reviewer: Is this a quote? I'm not sure why the carat symbols are here. Also, can you add references for the tools?

Reviewer 2: I think we should also link to the github code for these analyses - @cgreene should we link to each analysis separately or link to the general github for KidsFirst? Should we do it within the text or have a table - this may get long.

Reviewer: You can make things a link by enclosing them with brackets and using parens to provide the URL. Linking to the specific source code seems ideal since it's possible and we'd like this to be an exemplar of how to do open, reproducible science around a large collection of samples.

Reviewer 2: these have been referenced and github code linked

> > Aligned bam and chimeric sam files from STAR were used as inputs and GRCh38_gencode_v27 GTF was used for gene annotation in both tools.

Reviewer: BAM and SAM should probably be caps.

> > STAR-fusion was run with default paramters and fusion calls were annotated with GRCh38_v27_CTAT_lib_Feb092018.plug-n-play.tar.gz. 

Reviewer: Cite STAR-fusion

Reviewer 2: cited

> While running arriba, the additional blacklist file blacklist_hg38_GRCh38_2018-11-04.tsv.gz was provided in the arriba release tarballs to remove recurrent fusion artifacts and transcripts present in healthy tissue.
> Additionally strandedness information was provided to arriba or set to auto-detection for polyA samples.

> **Fusion prioritization**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fusion prioritization
```
Headers again

Reviewer 2: fixed

> All inframe and frameshift fusion calls with 1 or more junction reads and fused genes expressed at TPM >1 were used as true calls.
> If a fusion call had large number of spanning fragment reads compared to junction reads (if spanning fragment - junction read > 10) or if either 5\` or 3\` genes multi-fused > 5 different genes these were removed as a potential false positive.

> > A list of curated list of fusion calls for each histology was used to capture each occurence of the fusion as a putative driver fusion.

Reviewer: Where was this obtained from?

Reviewer 2: @kgaonkar6 - can you check whether all of these canonical fusions still remain if we do not use this list (ie they should be in the oncogene/TSG/COSMIC, etc lists)? If so, we can remove this list and part of the code.

> A union of fusion calls which were either detected by both callers, or the same fusion was recurrent in histology(>2 samples)  or the fusion was specific to the broad histology were prioritized as potential true calls. 

> > The putative driver fusions and prioritized fusions lists were annotated to identify kinases,oncogenic,tumor suppresor fused genes and known TCGA fusions. 

Reviewer: How did you do this annotation? A curated resource or something else? Also suppressor spelling and spaces b/w commas please.

Reviewer 2: see additional comments below

### Gene Expression Abundance Estimation

### RNA Fusion Calling and Prioritization
#### Gene Fusion Detection
We set up [Arriba v1.1.0](https://github.com/suhrig/arriba/) and STAR-Fusion 1.5.0 [@doi:10.1101/120295] fusion detection tools using CWL on CAVATICA.
For both these tools we used aligned BAM and chimeric SAM files from STAR as inputs and GRCh38_gencode_v27 GTF for gene annotation.

> We ran STAR-fusion with default paramters and annotated all fusion calls with GRCh38_v27_CTAT_lib_Feb092018.plug-n-play.tar.gz provided in the STAR-fusion release. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ran STAR-Fusion with default parameters and annotated all fusion calls with GRCh38_v27_CTAT_lib_Feb092018.plug-n-play.tar.gz provided in the STAR-fusion release. 
```

> While running arriba, we used the blacklist file blacklist_hg38_GRCh38_2018-11-04.tsv.gz that was provided in the arriba release tarballs to remove recurrent fusion artifacts and transcripts present in healthy tissue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Arriba, we used a blacklist file (blacklist_hg38_GRCh38_2018-11-04.tsv.gz) from the Arriba release tarballs to remove recurrent fusion artifacts and transcripts present in healthy tissue.
```

> Additionally we also provided strandedness information to arriba or we set it to auto-detection for polyA samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also provided Arriba with strandedness information or set it to auto-detection for polyA samples.
```

#### Fusion prioritization

> We set up a [fusion prioritization pipeline](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline) to filter and annotate fusion calls as described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We built a [fusion prioritization pipeline](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline) to filter and annotate fusions.
```

> We used all inframe and frameshift fusion calls with 1 or more junction reads and fused genes expressed at TPM >1 as true calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We considered all inframe and frameshift fusion calls with 1 or more junction reads and fused genes expressed at TPM >1 to be true calls.
```

> If a fusion call had large number of spanning fragment reads compared to junction reads (if spanning fragment - junction read > 10) or if either 5\` or 3\` genes multi-fused > 5 different genes we removed these calls as a potential false positive. We also removed fusions if the 5\` or 3\` were the same gene which were tagged as non-canonical splicing or duplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a fusion call had large number of spanning fragment reads compared to junction reads (if spanning fragment - junction read > 10) or if either 5\` or 3\` genes multi-fused > 5 different genes we removed these calls as a potential false positive.
We also removed fusions if the 5\` or 3\` were the same gene which were tagged as non-canonical splicing or duplication.
```

We used a list of curated list of fusion calls for each histology to capture each occurence of the fusion as a putative driver fusion.

> We prioritised a union of fusion calls as true calls if the fused genes were either detected by both callers , or the same fusion was recurrent in histology(>2 samples)  or the fusion was specific to the broad histology. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We prioritized a union of fusion calls as true calls if the fused genes were either detected by both callers, the same fusion was recurrent in histology (>2 samples) or the fusion was specific to the broad histology. 
```

> The putative driver fusions and prioritized fusions lists were annotated to identify kinases , oncogenic , tumor suppressor, transcription factor ,  fused genes and known TCGA fusions from curated [datasheets](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline/tree/master/references) . Additionally we also added chimerDB annotation to both driver and prioritised fusion list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The putative driver fusions and prioritized fusions lists were annotated to identify kinases, oncogenic, tumor suppressor, transcription factor,  fused genes and known TCGA fusions from curated [datasheets](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline/tree/master/references). We also added chimerDB [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1083] annotations to both driver and prioritized fusion list.
```

### Gene Expression Abundance Estimation

### RNA Fusion Calling and Prioritization

> #### Gene Fusion Detection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Gene fusion detection

```

Reviewer: Going to suggest sentence case (noticed they were inconsistent).

> We set up [Arriba v1.1.0](https://github.com/suhrig/arriba/) and STAR-Fusion 1.5.0 [@doi:10.1101/120295] fusion detection tools using CWL on CAVATICA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ran [Arriba v1.1.0](https://github.com/suhrig/arriba/) and STAR-Fusion 1.5.0 [@doi:10.1101/120295] fusion detection tools using CWL on CAVATICA.
```
Do you want to link to your CWL workflow?

> For both these tools we used aligned BAM and chimeric SAM files from STAR as inputs and GRCh38_gencode_v27 GTF for gene annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We input aligned BAM and chimeric SAM files from STAR to both of these methods and used GRCh38_gencode_v27 GTF for gene annotation.
```
Do you want to link GRCh38_gencode_v27's GTF file here? Since we can use hyperlinks, it seems like we might as well.

We ran STAR-Fusion with default parameters and annotated all fusion calls with GRCh38_v27_CTAT_lib_Feb092018.plug-n-play.tar.gz provided in the STAR-fusion release. 
For Arriba, we used a blacklist file (blacklist_hg38_GRCh38_2018-11-04.tsv.gz) from the Arriba release tarballs to remove recurrent fusion artifacts and transcripts present in healthy tissue.
We also provided Arriba with strandedness information or set it to auto-detection for polyA samples.

> #### Fusion prioritization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fusion prioritization

```

We built a [fusion prioritization pipeline](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline) to filter and annotate fusions.

> We considered all inframe and frameshift fusion calls with 1 or more junction reads and fused genes expressed at TPM >1 to be true calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We considered all inframe and frameshift fusion calls with 1 or more junction reads and fused genes expressed with TPM greater than one to be true calls.
```

> If a fusion call had large number of spanning fragment reads compared to junction reads (if spanning fragment - junction read > 10) or if either 5\` or 3\` genes multi-fused > 5 different genes we removed these calls as a potential false positive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a fusion call had large number of spanning fragment reads compared to junction reads (spanning fragment minus junction read greater than ten) or if either 5\` or 3\` genes fused to more than five different genes we removed these calls as a potential false positive.
```

> We also removed fusions if the 5\` or 3\` were the same gene which were tagged as non-canonical splicing or duplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also removed fusions if the 5\` or 3\` ends were the same gene, and these were tagged as non-canonical splicing or duplication.
```

> We used a list of curated list of fusion calls for each histology to capture each occurence of the fusion as a putative driver fusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used a list of curated fusion calls for each histology to capture each occurrence of the fusion as a putative driver fusion.
```

> We prioritized a union of fusion calls as true calls if the fused genes were either detected by both callers, the same fusion was recurrent in histology (>2 samples) or the fusion was specific to the broad histology. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We prioritized a union of fusion calls as true calls if the fused genes were detected by both callers, the same fusion was recurrent in histology (>2 samples) or the fusion was specific to the broad histology. 
```

> The putative driver fusions and prioritized fusions lists were annotated to identify kinases, oncogenic, tumor suppressor, transcription factor,  fused genes and known TCGA fusions from curated [datasheets](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline/tree/master/references). We also added chimerDB [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1083] annotations to both driver and prioritized fusion list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We annotated putative driver fusions and prioritized fusions lists with kinases, oncogenic, tumor suppressor, transcription factor, fused genes and known TCGA fusions from curated [datasheets](https://github.com/d3b-center/fusion_filtering_pipeline/tree/master/references).
We also added chimerDB [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1083] annotations to both driver and prioritized fusion list.
```
